So we selected an element in the DOM or multiple elements,
now we want to manipulate them.
That is not something we have done too often in this course,
sometimes like in the monster killer when we change the health bar that's rendered on the screen but it
is something you typically want to do a lot in Javascript heavy applications where you want to provide
that good user experience to the user, where you change things in the rendered user interface without
the need to reload a new page
with that changed HTML code, instead you want to change it in the already loaded page since that is
just faster and provides a smoother experienced than loading a new page.
So let's say we have a paragraph here with an ID and a CSS class and some text in there and
we selected this, for example with get element by ID which we can of course do with that welcome text
ID it has and store that in a constant
and now, what can we do with that?
Well for example, we can read its text content, welcome in this case and we do this with the text content
property which this exposes. We can also read the ID by accessing p.id and gets ID as a string
that's stored in there or the same for the CSS classes with the class name property. So important,
not .class but class name to get access to the CSS classes that are assigned as a text here
on the element.
So that's how we can read data from there,
something which you also want to do a lot.
You don't always immediately change things,
sometimes you also just want to find out in which current state is this element, which CSS class
does it have
but then you can also change this by for example assigning a new value to class name. Not all properties
of an element are writable but a lot of them are and then you can assign a new text here and this will
be reflected back in the DOM which the browser rendered and will of course be updated on the UI, totally
automatic by the browser,
so let's have a look at that.
So back here in our playground, let's say on that header here, on this h1 element, I want to change
the text color and the background color and maybe also the text which is shown in there.
Well then first of all, we can get access to it, I reloaded the page for this and now I'll create my h1
element with document and to mix things up, I'll use query selector h1 here, we could have
used get element by ID and use the ID which this h1 tag has, the main title and now this is stored
in h1, this is storing a reference to that DOM object which the browser exposes to us. Now here for
example, we can read text content and get the text which is in there or a class name to get that CSS
class string which is assigned to it, which currently is an empty string because indeed we have
no classes assigned here and of course other things as well.
Now let's say we want to change the text and for this, you can simply write text content equal and then
some new text for example and if you do that and you hit enter, this changes here on the screen
and what this does behind the scenes is it removes the old text node that was in there.
Remember it's a node, just a text node and instead created a new text node and replaced the old one with
it,
so that's what happened behind the scenes.
Now we can also assign a new CSS class by setting class name equal to title for example and
if we do that and we go to elements, now we see the class title on there and if we now had some CSS
code that would assign a certain style to that, we would see that
but since we don't have that, let's change the style in a different way by reaching out to h1 and
then there is a style property which in turn gives you access to a huge object with all these CSS
styles you can assign to an object just now translated to Javascript properties you could say. So
for example there you can set the color to white or to hex code
and now the text is white which makes it quite hard to read.
So let's also change the background color by going to h1 style and then import it here,
background-color would not work because this is not a valid property name,
you must not have dashes in there,
so instead all these CSS property names that have a dash in there are translated to Javascript
property names which are generally the same but where the dash is removed and to make it more readable
therefore, the first character after the dash,
so in this case the c, is replaced with a capital character, so background-color becomes background
color, like this
and now we can either read it,
well there's nothing in there because no value has been assigned or assign a value,
for example red. If you do that, you indeed see the red background, the white text and so on.
So this is how you can work with the properties on these elements and also manipulate them.
Now of course you might wonder, how do I know which properties are available?
Well for one, don't forget you can always console.dir h1 and then simply dive into it,
that is something I would recommend that you absolutely do because whilst there are many things which
you won't fully understand yet, you can just ignore them,
There are many things which you will understand and where you have an idea of where this value might
be coming from and what changing it might do
and you can also just try changing certain things, if it doesn't work, you can just reload the page
and start from scratch,
nothing can go wrong there, so simply just play around with that
but of course if you want a more official documentation with some explanations, you can always search
on MDN, for example for h1 element and find an article on that with detailed explanation about that
element of course and there important,
you'll find the DOM interface, in this case a HTML heading element,
this is in the end just the kind of object that is created automatically.
You don't need to learn these heart of course,
I'll dive into the relation between these different types of elements a little later once we learn more
about objects, for now
that doesn't really matter to us.
What's important here is you'll find that list of properties which it has and the methods it has.
Now what you see here for example is that a heading element doesn't really have any specific properties
or methods,
instead the HTML element which is kind of like an element or an object type this object type is based
on,
that's the one you want to have a look at.
So if you go into that, here we find a more extensive list of properties that is available with descriptions
of what they do and so on.
So this is something you also always can dive into learn more about it
but again, good old console.dir and looking into it is also something I would strongly recommend that
you also give a try to get a feeling for what's happening there. Now really important here by the way,
whatever you change here in Javascript will be lost whenever you reload the page because what you do
in Javascript is only stored in memory,
it of course doesn't affect the underlying files which were loaded which typically lie on some server
on the Internet,
so that of course changes. If you reload the page, you load these original files again and your Javascript
changes are lost because whenever you reload the page, this essentially resets your Javascript application,
it clears the existing application from memory in the end and starts a brand new application so your
Javascript file is parsed again and any changes you made are not kept around,
that's just a side note.